Is there anything wrong with faith schools? 

During the course of this lecture we addressed a controversy related to the
field of education, emerging in the context of teaching, indoctrination,
religious beliefs and morality. Within a previous assignment it was discussed
whether indoctrination is a necessary evil. In there, the issue of faith
schooling had been raised because those schools are often associated with the
problem of indoctrination. Discussing the question if there is something wrong
with faith schools this essay picks up on the earlier debate. Therefore, the
first section will outline a definition of faith schools as a crucial base to
answer the question. The subsequent parts will discuss different problems
regarding faith schools before concluding with a justified answer to the
question. 

Faith schools can be understood as ‘different kinds of schools […], […]
[which] are associated with a particular religion’ (Government, 2015, online).
Most of the faith schools are state-funded (Government, 2005) and around 33
per cent of all maintained schools are faith-based (Walford, 2010). Faith
schools follow the national curriculum but are free to focus only on one
religion in the religion classes. Additionally, they can have their own
admission requirements (Government, 2015). This definition given by the
UK Government can be considered to be general. The question remains unanswered
where the concrete differences are between faith schools and no-faith schools.
For Hand (2003) the difference exists in the additional mission of passing on
religious beliefs. He even goes so far to say that faith schools hold this
mission per definition. The faith schools which do not have the aim of passing
on religious beliefs should not be called faith schools because they do not
fulfill the essential purpose of those schools. It can be questioned in how
far the only distinctive difference between religious and non-religious
schools is their religion mission. In addition to Hand one could argue that
based on a different personal background the differences between those types
of schools can be seen in their kind of funding. As a consequence they might
have the aim to promote their religion, but that is not a necessary
requirement.
Comparing the two given definitions of faith schools it can be said that Hand
(2003) has a more empirical approach which includes a smaller number of
schools in comparison to the more descriptive definition made by the
Government. In this essay, a broadened term of faith schools will be used that
includes all kind of schools which are sponsored by a religious organisation
that follow the national curriculum and that are allowed to only teach one
religion.

Approaching the question in a formal way the terminology of 'faith' implicitly
raises the discussion if there should be made any distinction between faith
schools with different religions. It can be assumed that the values of a
specific religion play a role in the daily school life and could therefore be
considered in a more general debate based on the impact they may have. This
aspect however will be omitted in the following treatise due to the used
definition of faith schools, which holds true independently of a specific
religion. At the end of this essay it has to be judged if it is necessary to
distinguish between different types of faiths. 

As mentioned above, one meta-level problem of faith schools is the accusation
that they are indoctrinatory. Michael Hand is a strong advocate of this
hypothesis. His argumentation covers four premises which conclude that ‘faith
schools are, when successful, indoctrinatory’ (Hand, 2004, p. 343) and
therefore should be abolished. This argumentation is based on the premise that
the distinctive aim of faith schools is the mission of passing on religious
beliefs. Accepting this premise, his argumentation is logically correct:
School which promote indoctrination should be abolished. This argumentation
also works for the used definition if the aim of a faith school is to pass on
their own (and only) religious belief. 
But what is possibly wrong with those schools not having the aim of passing on
a specific religious belief? Referring back to the definition above, those
schools exist and one might also find other arguments addressing potential
problems with those schools as stated below.

One aspect is the question of social cohesion and the impact of faith schools
on social division. After the riots in 2001 the Home Office instituted the
Independent Review Team (IRT), chaired by Ted Cantle (2001), to do some
research about the factors influencing social and community cohesion. So far,
there is no clear evidence that faith schools cause social division. But, by
following the argumentation given by the IRT (2001) or the Runnymede Trust
(2008), there is a connection between faith schools and social cohesion
justified with the following argumentation: Parents send their children to
faith schools because they live in the catchment area or because they want
their child to be educated (not indoctrinated) in their religion.  Especially,
but not only, the latter reason causes a quite homogeny group of pupils with
one religion. The pupils do not have contact to children with other religions
or values. How can the pupil build real tolerance and awareness if they are
staying in a solely homogeny group (regarding religion and values)? It is
tempting to argue that the personal self capable of social cohesion based upon
a certain set of experiences and feelings (eg tolerance and awareness in its
purest nature) can not be indoctrinated or taught, and therefore it is not
possible to learn these things in the environment and context of a limiting
faith school, and as an additional aspect pointed out by Hand (2003): To teach
something does not mean to learn something or to come to know something. 

Another problem with non-indoctrinatory faith schools can be recognised by
changing the viewpoint and having a look from the perspective of the pupils
themselves. Pupils who visit faith schools which only promote one religion are
narrowed down regarding their knowledge about other religions. Furthermore,
they do not have the chance to choose a religion because of the missing
knowledge. This could create a form of religious ignorance towards other
religious. A weakness of this argument, however, is the problem that it is
hard to judge in how far children with religious parents are in general able
to choose a religion.  Nevertheless it has to be taken in account that the
problem of restricted knowledge exists.	

After pointing out the problems arising with faith schools one should also
outline the supposedly positive aspects of faith schools. Some authors (XXXXX)
argue that pupils from faith schools are better qualified in comparison to
pupils who never visited those schools. It as to be said that there is
inconsistent research for this argumentation (SOURCE?). If this was true, the
concrete reasons would have to be analysed: Is it either the predominat
religion with its values or maybe even a higher amount of money that is
invested in those schools? If the former aspect were the case, the question
follows if it applies for all religions because their values could be quite
different. If the latter aspect is the case, this argument for religious
schools can be diminished by giving more money to non-faith schools. The
question remains whether qualification can be directly influenced by the
(faith) school, or whether any correlation in that context is much more
complex and depends on a huge variety of factors such as parental income,
environment, personal abilities and targets, teaching staff experience,
motivation, dedication and more.

Returning to the question posed at the beginning of this essay it is now
possible to say that there are propositions which underpin that there is
something wrong with faith schools. But the argumentation is not only based on
the fact that faith schools are indoctrinatory, as argued by Hand (2003), but
also that faith schools in general are prone to create social division and
intolerance towards other religions and cultures. It should have become clear
that those objections do not automatically count for all faith schools. This
conclusion requests methods to measure in how far individual faith schools try
to indoctrinate and create social division. Even though different types of
schools are all subsumed under the term of a faith school it does not
necessarily mean that they work in the same way and the issue allows
differentiated views.

Thinking about the topic for another essay, it would be interesting to
try……..GOOD QUESTION ? 



Brighouse, H. (2006) On Edcuation. London: Routledge

Hand, M. (2003) A philosophical Objection to Faith Schools. Theory and Research in Education, 1 (1), 89–99. 

Hand, M. (2004) The problem with faith schools. A reply to my critics. Theory and Research, 2 (3), 343-353.

Government (2015) Types of schools – Faith schools [online]. Available from https://www.gov.uk/types-of-	school/faith-schools [Accessed 20.4.2015] 

Independent Review Team (2001) Community Cohesion: A report of the Independent 		Review Team. Chaired by Ted Cantle. London: Home Office

Runnymede Trust (2008) Right to divide [online]. Available from	 	http://www.runnymedetrust.org/uploads/publications/pdfs/RightToDivide-2008.pdf 	[Accessed 15th April 2015] 	
Walford, G. (2010) Faith schools and community cohesion. In Grimmitt, M. (ed.) 	Religious 	education and social and community cohesion: An exploration of challenges and 	opportunities, pp. 88-XXXX. Great Warkering: McCrimmon. 



